# Tyson Foods, Inc. (TSN)

 ### Overview:
We’ve all seen Tyson Foods somewhere, whether it’s at the grocery store, in our old school cafeteria, or in other brands that we see on the supermarket shelves. Tyson is the fifth-largest food and beverage company in the U.S. and had over $43 Billion in revenue last year. In addition to their well-known Tyson-branded products, they also own the brands of Hillshire Farm, Jimmy Dean, Ball Park, State Fair, and many others. Over the past few years, Tyson restructured their subsidiaries and shifted their focus to protein-based products. This shift included divesting from non-protein businesses, refocusing on existing protein businesses, and acquiring other businesses with protein-focused products. I will not try to draw causation between this restructuring and Tyson’s improved margins and profitability, but I do like when businesses focus on their core competencies. We don’t see a case of “diworsification” here, as Peter Lynch likes to call the actions of companies that spread their acquisitions and subsidiaries too far from their strengths. Tyson is great at cranking out billions of dollars worth of protein products, and I am glad that they are maintaining focus on these products. As I dug into Tyson’s numbers, I found improved profitability, heavy cash flows, an improving financial position, and the ability to show signs of growth during the pandemic. These are all good signs, but I invested in Tyson because I could get all this for a cheap price.  
  
One more thing before we dive in. It is important to note that Tyson’s 10-Ks use the last 4 quarters leading up to the *calendar* 4Q of each year; in other words, each year’s 10-K is released in November and contains data for the last 3 months of the previous year and the first 9 months of the year of its release. This is actually quite useful for us because unlike other companies that release their 10-Ks in March, we have an audited, comprehensive 10-K that includes impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic and contains data as of 10/3/2020. I want to make it clear that because of this method of reporting, when I refer to “this year,” I mean the entire year ending 10/3/20, which includes the last 3 months of 2019. Likewise, “last year” refers to the last 3 months of 2018 and the first 9 months of 2019. 

### Analysis: 
 Tyson’s long-term earnings growth over the past decade has been about 534%. This calculation method is the same long-term earnings growth calculation that I’ve used in the past — the average earnings of 2018, 2019, and 2020 compared to the average earnings of 2008, 2009, and 2010. Using the same method, Tyson’s earnings are up about 150% from 5 years ago. Earnings are up 5% from last year, which is impressive given both the size of Tyson and the impact that the pandemic has had on many American consumers. Considering that Tyson is the fifth-largest food and beverage company in the country, this stalwart company still offers a record of significant earnings growth. Earnings are one thing, but we should consider Tyson’s cash flows as well. Joel Greenblatt likes to say that a business is worth the present value of the cash you can take out of it over its lifetime. Solid cash flows are an essential consideration when prudently investing. Lucky for us, cash flow is where Tyson shines. 
 
Free Cash flow is up 113% from last year and 203% from a decade ago. Even better, cash flow/share has improved by even more due to share buybacks. Why the steep increase in free cash flow since 2019? In addition to higher sales and earnings, Tyson has sold off built-up inventories and reduced their accounts receivable (i.e. got paid). Tyson’s free cash flow growth is impressive, but not only has free cash flow been improving on its own, it has been improving relative to net income. So in addition to bringing in more profits, Tyson has taken further steps to increase the amount of cash they bring in for each dollar of profit. Their Free Cash Flow/Net Income margin has been improving year-over-year for the past three years and is at its highest since 2015. Improved free cash flow over the short-term and long-term? Great. Improved free cash flow relative to earnings? Even better.
I questioned if Tyson’s improved earnings and cash flows were sustainable, and as I dug deeper, it made a lot more sense why they were bringing in more profits and cash than they had in the past: Tyson has had superb profit margin growth recently. One of Tyson’s shining gold stars is its recently improved profitability. Gross Profit, EBITDA, and EBIT margins are all at their highest since 2004, so it’s no surprise that Tyson is able to bring in sublime earnings growth over the last decade. Looking at averages from a decade ago (again, same long-term growth calculation), their gross profit margin has increased from 6% to 13%, and their net income margin has more than tripled. These profit margins should enable Tyson to continue to pull in big profits and create generous returns for shareholders.  

It’s clear to me that the real value Tyson brings is in its profitability and cash flow. We must now consider the price that you pay to invest in Tyson. Howard Marks would tell you that “The relationship between price and value holds the ultimate key to investing success.” The price you pay for your investment is inherently tied to your return. Fortunately, Tyson’s profits and cash flows can be purchased at a discount. Tyson’s P/E sits at 10.92, which is significantly lower than the consumer staples index P/E of 27.43 and lower than any of its industry peers’ P/Es. Looking at Tyson’s own track record of P/E and Price/Book Value, Tyson has gotten significantly cheaper since last year. And remember those important and enticing cash flows I was talking about earlier? They’re even cheaper. Tyson’s Price/Cash Flow is at its lowest in the past decade, and compared to its industry peers, Tyson has by far the lowest Price/Cash Flow—Tyson’s is just under 7, and the next lowest of its peers sits around 11.5. Tyson’s peers’ average Price/Cash Flow is 18.8, and the index sits at 17.32. To truly manage risk, you have to ensure that you’re paying a fair price for your investment. Tyson’s cash flows and profitability are great, but more importantly, these qualities are available at a price that allows for a margin of safety—an integral characteristic of a successful long-term investing. 

Central to the success of long-term compounding growth is the avoidance of loss. I, like many investors who have inspired me, think of risk as the permanent loss of capital. Paying the right price is essential, but I also try to ensure my investments are in businesses with strong financial positions that can weather adversity and continue to offer generous returns through a variety of market conditions. Even with the pandemic hitting businesses hard, Tyson was able to not only maintain a strong financial position, but they were actually able to improve it. Their current ratio of 1.86 is their best since 2013 and has been improving year-over-year ever since. Working capital is up 120% since last year and is at its highest in the past decade. Tyson is no star when it comes to financial position, though. They have over 34 billion dollars of long-term debt and their current ratio is nothing to write home about. However, they are repaying more debt than they are issuing, their assets are growing faster than their liabilities, and their book value is steadily increasing. Book value is up 10% from last year and over 200% from a decade ago. More importantly, book value/share has increased year-over-year since 2009 and sits at 42.37 today (not bad when a share is trading at $63.45!). Tyson doesn’t offer the ironclad financial position that some other companies we’ve assessed do. However, Tyson’s ability to improve its financial position over the past decade and especially their ability to maintain this growth through a global pandemic provide ample evidence that this enormous company can withstand adversity, maintain strong financial health, and reduce risk for shareholders who are focused on compounding capital for the long-term.

### Closing Thoughts:
A few notes on Tyson before I wrap things up. Tyson has been in the news frequently in the past year for enabling poor working conditions for employees during the pandemic. They shut down some plants and fired managers for inexcusable actions and shameful leadership. Tyson conducted an independent investigation and hired a new Chief Medical Officer, Claudia Coplein, who has a DO, JD, MPH, and MBA. Hopefully, this investigation and major personnel changes will create a company that better serves its employees, animals, and customers. On the flipside, publicity like this could offer a bargain price for us as investors. As some institutional investors and analysts shy away from Tyson’s negative reputation and management malpractice, a depressed stock price could present a ripe opportunity for a value investment. 

Unlike some of my past investments, profitability and cash flows are what drew me to Tyson. I was surprised that a company of this size was still growing its earnings and improving margins. Most importantly, Tyson can be bought at $63.45—a cheap price relative to its strength. Investing in this stalwart company will not be the most exciting investment that you make, but I believe Tyson is trading at a discount and provides a margin of safety necessary to compound capital over the long-term.

### Brendan Kiely, 1/10/2021
<br>

**Sources, In order of reference:**

1. “2019 Top 100 Food & Beverage Companies.” *Food Engineering Magazine*. Accessed January 7, 2021.
2. “Annual Report.” 10-K. Tyson Foods, Inc., n.d. SEC Filings. Tyson.com/Investors.
3. Lynch, Peter, and John Rothchild. *One up on Wall Street: How to Use What You Already Know to Make Money In the Market*. Riverside: Simon & Schuster, 2000.
4. TIKR Terminal. “Tyson Foods, Inc. (TSN).” Accessed January 7, 2021.
5. Morningstar. “Tyson Foods Inc Class A (TSN) Valuation - XNYS | Morningstar.” Accessed January 7, 2021.
6. Marks, Howard. *The Most Important Thing: Uncommon Sense for the Thoughtful Investor*. Columbia Business School Publishing. New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 2011.
7. Charles Schwab. “Tyson Foods Inc, Comparisons.” Accessed January 7, 2021.
8. Wamsley, Laurel. “Tyson Foods Fires 7 Plant Managers Over Betting Ring On Workers Getting COVID-19.” NPR.org, December 16, 2020.
9. Clyma, Kimberlie. “Tyson Hires Chief Medical Officer.” *Food Business News*. Accessed January 7, 2021.
