# Corcept Therapeutics (CORT)  

The second company that I added to my portfolio was a younger company in a line of business much different than cement. This second company was Corcept Therapeutics—a pharmaceutical company based out of California and founded in 1998. I first found Corcept on October 30th on the list of “magic formula” stocks on Joel Greenblatt’s magicformulainvesting.com. This list features the top 30 stocks on the market based on their combined Return on Capital and Earnings Yield, using data from October 29th. I knew that its place on this list gave Corcept some merit, but I chose Corcept over other companies on this list for several reasons. Corcept offers a record of rapid growth and a strong and improving financial position, but its most enticing characteristic is its sublime returns on capital. It may not hit all the traditional value benchmarks, but the characteristics I mentioned above contribute to a margin of safety that I believe qualifies this position as having value.  

First, a brief overview of what Corcept does. Corcept performs research, development, and commercialization of drugs that treat a variety of disorders related to excess cortisol activity. Cortisol is a hormone, sometimes called a “stress hormone,” that helps to fuel your fight-or-flight response. Because of its natural importance as an instinctual response, cortisol can have significant effects on your blood pressure, blood sugar, sleep cycles, and even your digestive, reproductive, and immune systems. As you can imagine, if your cortisol levels are unbalanced, there can be significant negative effects on your health. This is where Corcept’s products come in. Corcept is engaged in research and development of cortisol modulators, which can help control cortisol levels and treat many health conditions, such as Cushing’s Syndrome, a condition that occurs from the presence of too much cortisol activity over a long period of time. Corcept’s only FDA-approved drug, Korlym, is used to treat certain Cushing’s Disease patients. Corcept is also engaged in research and clinical trials regarding the role of cortisol and cortisol modulators in patients with pancreatic, ovarian, prostate, breast, and lung cancer, along with Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis (NASH) and weight gain induced by antipsychotic drugs. The possibilities of these trials are enticing, but as you know from my last post, I’m not here to try to predict the future or speculate about the results of these trials, especially as someone with no biomedical experience and limited knowledge of the pharmaceutical industry. It’s important to me to recognize that I don’t know what I don’t know. As I did with my last report, I will try to assess Corcept to the best of my ability based on its financial reports, news, and records using what knowledge I have in equity assessment and value investing.  

Taking a step back to look at Corcept’s earnings record, it posted its first year of positive net income in 2016. Due to past net income losses, tax benefits from carryforwards, and other tax benefits that complicate the net income metric, I found it most helpful to use EDIT, or Income from Operations, as an earnings metric to better measure the performance of the company on a standardized level between years. EBIT was positive starting in 2016, when it came in at $10.7 million. It then increased to $52.8 million in 2017, $89.5 million in 2018, and $111.6 million by 2019 year’s end. I’m not going to try to project earnings or extrapolate this trend into the future, but this growth rate is surely a sign of strength, especially given that revenues followed this same pattern. Revenues also increased during all three of the first three quarters of 2020. In addition, R&D has also increased year-over-year since 2016, showing that Corcept is still able to continually invest in its future while maintaining earnings growth for shareholders.   

Looking at the past two years, EBIT was up 25% from 2018 to 2019 (net income by roughly the same amount), but earnings per share increased by 28%. Why the discrepancy? Corcept has been repurchasing shares since 2018 and will likely continue to do so. Corcept announced a stock repurchasing program on November 3, 2020 that allows for up to $200 million worth of shares to be bought back in the next year. This is no guarantee by any means, but their track record of buying back shares coupled with this announcement provides good evidence of future buybacks. This is generally good news for the investor, but what is perhaps more attractive to the investor, and what truly makes this company stand out to me, is Corcept’s profitability.  

To even make it on the magic formula list, you have to have solid returns on capital, but Corcept has exemplary returns. The magic formula uses return on capital, which is a bit different from return on equity, which I’ll be using here. The software that I currently use for company and index comparisons doesn’t allow me to easily compare return on capital across all comparisons, so I primarily used return on equity to evaluate Corcept’s ability to turn profits and efficiently run its business. Let’s run down some reference points first. Using the last 12 months, the S&P 500 averaged a 15.17% return on equity. Corcept is not part of the S&P 500 index, but I just threw that number out there as a reference point. Corcept is, however, part of the S&P Smallcap 600 Index, which has returned 3.62% on equity in the past 12 months. The S&P US BMI Health Care index returned 13.94%. But Corcept has returned a whopping 30.36% on equity. You could use return on assets or return on capital in company comparisons as well if you’d like. If you compare Corcept to its “peers,” or its competitors in the industry with similar market caps, its return on assets, return on equity, and return on capital all blow its competitors out of the park. If you look at profit margins, Corcept is actually running better margins than the industry leaders (in addition to its peers). I compared Corcept to Johnson & Johnson, Pfizer, Merck & Co., Abbott Laboratories, and AbbVie, and Corcept had a better gross profit margin, operating profit margin, and net profit margin than any of these large companies. The only company with a better cash flow margin was Pfizer. Corcept offers sublime profitability, and their return on equity is a terrific sight to the investor. After all, it’s important that they’re employing their invested capital effectively. It’s apparent to me that Corcept can efficiently turn capital into profits that can fuel growth and add value for the investor.  

Corcept is a young company, and some might view its purchase as a growth play due to its rapid earnings growth, lack of a dividend, and overall youth (it’s only been around since 1998). However, Corcept still has a very strong financial position, which has been improving year-over-year in the recent past. Even though Corcept pumps millions into R&D each year, their ratio of current assets to current liabilities has been increasing year-over-year since 2016. As of the end of 3Q 2020, it sits at 10.77. And without any long-term debt, the ratio of the current assets to total liabilities is just slightly lower. What set Corcept apart from many of its competitors on the magic formula list was this strong and improving financial position. Corcept has a heavy and healthy amount of working capital, and its current ratio far exceeds Ben Graham’s 2:1 requirement for an adequate financial position. However, Corcept doesn’t pay dividends, nor does it offer a P/E or price/book ratio below Graham’s suggested threshold, even though its P/E of 18.69 is lower than many other competitors in the pharma industry.  

Corcept doesn’t check all the boxes for a traditional value play. I don’t think this disqualifies Corcept from being a value investment, though. Joel Greenblatt will tell you that value investing comes down to figuring out what a business is worth and paying less. This is what I see in Corcept. Corcept has been able to rapidly grow in a competitive space, return excellent profits relative to invested capital, and throughout this growth maintain an ironclad financial position. Warren Buffet said that “It’s far better to buy a wonderful company at a fair price than a fair company at a wonderful price,” and although Corcept may not be the cheapest stock on the market, I think that its price is more than fair, and I believe that purchasing Corcept at its price of $18.14 today provides a strong margin of safety and provides value to the investor.  



#### Brendan Kiely, 11/13/2020 
<br>

**Sources, In Order of Reference:**
1. Corcept. See  “Cortisol Modulation,” “Cortisol Modulation Therapeutic Platform,” and “Pipeline and Clinical Trials” under “Research and Pipeline.” Accessed November 9, 2020. https://www.corcept.com/research-pipeline/impact-of-cortisol-and-gr-modulation/.  
2. “SEC Filings | Corcept.” Accessed November 11, 2020. https://ir.corcept.com/sec-filings/.  
3. “Corcept Therapeutics Announces Third Quarter 2020 Financial Results and Provides Corporate Update - Corcept.” Accessed November 9, 2020. https://ir.corcept.com/news-releases/news-release-details/corcept-therapeutics-announces-third-quarter-2020-financial/.  
4. Charles Schwab Research. “Corcept Therapeutics Inc., Comparisons.”   
5. Ritholtz, Barry. “Joel Greenblatt on Relative Value Investing (Podcast).” Masters in Business, October 9, 2020.  
6. Buffet, Warren. “Berkshire Hathaway Inc. Shareholder Letters-1989.”  
