# Monarch Cement Company (MCEM)   

The first company that became part of my portfolio is in a line of business that some may find boring: Cement. I decided that, at least for now, it didn’t make sense to shy away from boring industries or companies. My goal is to find companies that I can buy for bargain prices in any industry. Peter Lynch was my main inspiration for embracing boring industries and companies. He argues that boring companies are often ignored by most investors, who would rather follow cutting-edge companies with new technologies and attractive products. He suggests (at least for an amateur like myself) turning instead to companies with boring, time-tested products that are made better by other technologies that improve their production efficiency or implementation. Monarch Cement Company is exactly that.  

Monarch Cement Co. has been manufacturing cement in Kansas for over 100 years. Their main products are ready-mix concrete and portland cement—a generic term for the cement used in almost all concrete today. I approached this equity with a Ben Graham approach, using many of his metrics to evaluate the company. As I’ll explain, it passed many of these conditions with flying colors. I will say, however, that I do not consider this company a “cigar butt” that I chose simply for its discount. Monarch Cement Company is trading at an attractive price below book value, but it also offers a record of earnings growth and a record of improving its financial position year-over-year. 

My analysis will focus primarily on the company as it is today; at this point in time, I will not attempt projections for this company. I will be taking Joel Greenblatt’s advice that he gives to the amateur investor. He says, “If you still want to buy individuals stocks despite all the warnings, don’t make a lot of predictions.” Following this advice (maybe a little too much), I performed no projections. Quite honestly, projections are not something I have mastered yet, and I don’t know what I don’t know. At this point in my career, I don’t think that any modeling borne out of my limited knowledge of the topic will help me assess this company in any way. Using the knowledge that I have acquired through my independent reading and listening, I primarily focused on Monarch as it is today and whether or not its price relative to its fundamentals provides a sufficient margin of safety to warrant its purchase. 

I’ll get to Monarch’s solid financial position shortly, but I thought it important to first mention Monarch’s earnings growth over the past decade I approached long-term growth using Ben Graham’s method of three-year averages, taking the average annual earnings from 2017-2019 and comparing them to average annual earnings from 2007-2009. For this decade, earnings grew by roughly 136%, or roughly 9% annually (compounded). Earnings per share growth was slightly higher. Looking more closely at recent earnings, Monarch weathered a rough 1Q 2020, with earnings coming in at a $11,983,478 loss. However, this loss was almost entirely an unrealized loss from equity investment. They actually posted a gross profit from operating during 1Q 2020 that was over $5 million more than 1Q 2019. Furthermore, comparing 1Q 2020 to 1Q 2019, sales and earnings from operations were both higher in 2020. The crash in March, right at the end of 1Q, hurt the company on paper, but there are still signs of strength in Monarch’s operations during the first quarter of 2020. Monarch even remained strong through lockdowns and panic that continued into the second quarter of 2020. In fact, earnings for 2Q 2020 were 21% higher than 2Q 2019. Looking at the first six months of 2020 relative to the first six months of 2019, you’d find that their sales increased by 10.8% and gross profit from operations increased by 65.6%, all amidst a recession in 2020. Although 2020 presented difficulties and uncertainties in analyzing the company, I think that Monarch’s growing sales and gross profit and quick earnings rebound provide evidence of a strong company that can weather a storm. Taking a step back, after a down year in 2018, earnings in 2019 were at a record high, and in 2020, with gross profits up, sales up, and cost of sales down from the same time in 2019, it would not surprise me if earnings growth follows.

Turning to the balance sheet, Monarch is in a strong position, and although the difficulties of the first half of 2020 put a strain on cash, current assets are still higher than 2019 due to an increase in accounts receivable. What is most staggering to me is Monarch’s strong cash position. The reason I mentioned earlier that I chose Monarch with a “Ben Graham” approach is due to Monarch’s strong financial position, which is a requirement for many of Ben Graham’s criteria that he lays out in *The Intelligent Investor*. For example, Graham suggests a ratio of current assets to current liabilities of at least 2:1. Monarch’s ratio is greater than 5:1. They have just over $70 million in working capital, which dwarfs their $721,154 in long-term debt. Perhaps more impressive, though, is that even if you ignore all their receivables, inventories, and other current assets, they still have a cash position that is net positive of all total current liabilities. Monarch has impressive working capital, but how well does Monarch employ their capital? After all, I want to know how well they can turn invested capital into earnings. Using Joel Greenblatt’s method of calculating return on capital, which takes EBIT/(net working capital+fixed assets), Monarch has already returned 8.8% through the first half of 2020, and back in 2019, they returned 13.98% on capital. If earnings keep pace, they’ll be in a good place to return higher earnings relative to capital for 2020 than they did in 2019, which is a great sign for the investor.

Monarch may be in strong financial condition, and they may also have strong earnings growth and earnings potential, but through my readings and learning thus far, it has become clear that an investment’s risk and its margin of safety are inherently tied to the price paid for the security. At least at this point in my career, it’s difficult to look at many different ratios alone and understand whether they are favorable for investment or not, so I figured when considering ratios such as P/E, return on equity, price/sales, and price/book value, it would be best to compare Monarch to its industry in order to assess its relative value and favorability relative to alternative companies. I’ll be using the S&P United States BMI Materials sector index as a benchmark for the materials sector in America. Comparing Monarch to the larger materials industry shows some favorable results. Using the trailing 12 months of financials and a market price on 10/22/2020 of $56.50, Monarch’s P/E sits at 9.88 compared to the 49.17 benchmark. Monarch also has a significantly higher dividend yield and return on equity compared to the larger industry. Finally, where the materials industry index gives an average price/book ratio of 2.48, Monarch comes in at a cool 0.74.

With Monarch’s attractive returns, sales, earnings, and dividends relative to its price, Monarch offers inviting value. Taking a huge step back, Monarch is an old American company that has been thriving in the Midwest for over a century. Although their line of business isn’t an intriguing topic of discussion, they’re a solid and growing business. With the price the market is offering today, I find value in this company, and, hopefully, I’ll find profits too.


#### Brendan Kiely, 10/28/2020
<br>

**Sources, In order of reference:**    
1. Peter Lynch and John Rothchild, *One Up on Wall Street: How to Use What You Already Know to Make Money in the Market*, 2nd ed. (Simon & Schuster, 2000).  
2. Joel Greenblatt, *The Little Book That Still Beats the Market,* (John Wiley & Sons, 2010), 110.     
3. “Financials,” Monarch Cement Company, accessed October 22, 2020, http://monarchcement.com/investors/financials/.     
4. Benjamin Graham and Jason Zweig, *The Intelligent Investor: The Definitive Book on Value Investing*, Revised (Harper Business, 2006).  
5. “Monarch Cement Co. Index Comparisons,” Charles Schwab, accessed October 22, 2020.    
